The
Economist hello and welcome to the
intelligence from The Economist I'm
Jason Palmer and I'm Rosie bla every
weekday we provide a fresh perspective
on the events shaping your
world something like 95% of Africans
have some kind of religious affiliation
and numbers have risen most strongly
among the young as they leave the
continent with their faith in toe
African churches are springing up all
over the
place and Gladiator 2 is out in the UK
today and the us next week if all
historical films say as much about our
own age as the one they're depicting
what asks our correspondent do these
musly figures and superhuman strength
slaves tell us about ourselves
first up
though we're going to work very hard on
Russia and
Ukraine last night us president-elect
Donald Trump underlined one of his key
foreign policy promises to end the war
in
Ukraine it's got to stop Russia and
Ukraine's Got to stop thousands and thou
I saw a report today thousands of people
over the last 3 days were killed
thousands and thousands of people were
killed they happened to be soldiers but
whether their soldiers his relationship
both with Russia and Ukraine is
complicated he's consistently refused to
condemn Vladimir Putin's Invasion he
appears to admire the Russian dictator's
strongman style and he once tried to
Blackmail Ukraine by withholding
military assistance so you might think
that Trump's election victory would be a
crushing blow to Ukraine and yet after
the election everyone in Ukraine is of
course a signed up member of the Maga
crowd I mean I've even seen make Ukraine
great again cap doing the
rounds alliv Caroll is the economist's
Ukraine
correspondent but in truth at least part
of the political and Military leadership
were hoping for a trump Victory I'm
really surprised to hear you say that in
what way could Trump be good for UK UK
indeed there is nothing in Trump's
history that makes him seem particularly
Pro Ukrainian he's also quite fond about
Vladimir Putin and his strongman Antics
and he never really condemned The
Invasion so it tells you really a little
bit about how sticky the relationship
between zalinski and the Biden
administration had come of recent times
the Americans were on their side annoyed
that the Ukrainian sort of boots on the
table cowboy type diplomacy the
ukrainians are hand were getting annoyed
at what they saw was the rhetoric of
support being in it for as long as it
takes for a Ukrainian Victory but they
saw actions that were saying otherwise
so in the end they were kind of ready to
exchange that drip drip life support for
a gamble you could you know argue it
either way Ukraine obviously hopes that
Trump will be strong and decisive put an
end to the dithering though everyone
here understands the range of
possibilities is much greater from very
bad to very good but wasn't Trump
actually promising to the war within 24
hours I mean there's a general
understanding on both sides Russia and
Ukraine if not perhaps in the Trump Camp
they maybe even there that you can't end
this war in 24 hours there are too many
complicated moments I was chatting to
one high place Source who's regularly in
the Kremlin and he said quick piece is
not going to happen maybe a ceasefire
but only if that was combined with a
discussion of what he called a new
security system so essentially we're
back to something like the mans of
febrary 2022 Ukraine on the other hand
doesn't believe Russia will stop so
again I was just chatting this week to M
Paka presidential advisor and he said
why would they they haven't got what
they wanted and they're still pushing
but he thinks I me this is the the
ukrainians really hope that as soon as
Trump starts to understand the real
picture as soon as he realizes the Putin
of 2016 is no more there's a different
Putin a more aggressive Putin and more
confident Putin that Trump would
eventually move to a position that is
more favorable to Ukraine so the idea of
these two alpha males jostling for
position Putin wants to be number one
Trump obviously will not want to be
number two so in this sense actually a
strong armed proposal by Trump might
offer zalinski a way out he could say
brothers and sisters this is the Brave
New World we don't really have a choice
but to be honest I don't think zalinski
himself is in a psychological position
to do that at the moment you say it
might offer Ukraine a way out but do we
have any sense of what a plan could be
yeah so I mean basically before the
election there were two published plans
and this is what Ukraine had been
working off the first was associated
with vice president elect JD Vance and
that was essentially phrasing the
conflict on the current lines forcing
Ukraine into a sense of neutrality
without any sense of any security
guarantees or checks on Putin obviously
it's a very unpopular position in
Ukraine that's position number one a
second position came from Mike Pompeo
the former Secretary of State and that
was more palatable to ukrainians it was
the idea about creating a surge more
weapons more money that would boost
Ukraine's standing perhaps even there
would be the offer of NATO membership
there of course ukrainians are much more
happy with this proposal but the fact
that Trump has publicly pushed pompe out
of the picture doesn't look fantastic
from Ukraine's standpoint and the top
security official I was speaking to this
week said it was a really negative
development that now they were thinking
that actually they might be pushed more
towards the Vance proposal which looks
essentially like territorial concessions
NATO out of the picture what they were
hoping was there would be some kind of
security guarantee and they're worried
about that they might try and take
European union membership and Russia
essentially forcing the militarization
on them and that's unacceptable for
Ukraine and is there anything to stop
him going for the Vance proposal
territorial concessions a lot still has
to be played out but I think that
wholesale sellout is unlikely the news
that Trump might be appointing Mike
Waltz and Marco Rubio into top security
and state positions both of whom they've
been moderately hawkish towards Russia
in the past at certain points at the
very least that's been more welcomed in
Ukraine Ukraine presented what they
called a victory plan just before the
elections it was presented first of all
to Joe Biden but also to Donald Trump
but they inserted Clauses which
suggested that the US might be given
some control of certain natural
resources for example and that Ukrainian
troops might be sent to replace US
troops in Europe so Ukraine feels it has
a chance it feels if zalinski can get in
Trump's ear if he can do this while
Trump is figuring out where he stands on
the issue they have a chance I think the
problem is that Russia understands this
too and Russia has better resources and
it is better at working Washington and
the Republican party to its interest
history has shown that so I think it
will require a huge effort from Ukraine
and from Ukraine's Partners to overturn
this disadvantage OE isn't it an
incredibly precarious moment for Ukraine
Russia continues to move forward Ukraine
is not on the front foot and now we have
no idea what's going to happen yeah
totally I mean I think the East you know
Russia is at the moment surging throwing
every it has at its assaults there's
been a huge blood cost for russan
British military say 1,500 killed and
wounded in Action a day and so there is
a question how long that can last for
the sad reality is that we've been
asking this question for the whole of
the last year and throughout that year
of Russia's offensive they have been
recruiting more men than they had been
losing they are growing their forces
unlike Ukraine and Ukraine's likely to
be in Retreat for the rest of the year
probably very soon from K which is a
stronghold just outside of donet and
then they'll probably turn to pakos
we've been speaking about that quite a
lot recently an important coal mining
town and a transport Hub and parallel to
that Russia is also apparently gearing
up for an assault on zapia which would
be incredibly damaging to Ukraine's
industrial base it's an important
industrial Hub so this short-term
problem has been about Ukrainian men and
management we have a breakdown in
Authority a breakdown in morale
tensions between part of the army which
is Young technocratic and ready to
experiment in a general class which is
less so it was put to me by an
intelligent source that the generals
were trying to increase milk production
by milking the cow for twice as long how
we put it and people in the in the rear
see that and that's creating a sort of
weakness in the rear they they don't
want to go to the front lines to die
huge deserter numbers so there really
couldn't be more on the line here in a
way that challenge of trump is just the
icing on the cake for a country that's 3
years into war whose very existence
still lies very much in the
balance olle thank you for talking to me
I'm sure we will talk again soon it's
always a
pleasure I also wanted to let you know
about an event on Monday which is open
to subscri subcribers Demis hassabis of
Google Deep Mind will be discussing how
AI transforms science with James manika
also of Google and moderated by aloc jar
host of our science podcast babage
search subscriber event on our site to
sign up
the uras songs that you're hearing now
are from a church service part of a
praise and worship segment that would
typically open the service at a
Pentecostal Church like this
one and this specific church is a branch
of the Nigeria's Redeemed Christian
Church of God but this church isn't in
Lagos where I'm usually based these
worshippers are in
London as you well know or ogan be
previously my co-host is now our Africa
correspondent although congregations in
the west are shrinking churches like
these have been growing across Britain
for years and their growth is also
proving a boost for the home churches in
Nigeria as
well so this seems to be sort of counter
to the the current we often hear about
in terms of falling numbers in terms of
churchgoers well exactly these pews have
been increasingly packed with young
Africans this a group of migrants that
have been steadily arriving to Britain
since the 1980s probably even a bit
earlier and these days 95% of Africans
have a religious affiliation of some
sort over half of them are Christian so
when they move they take their religion
with them and they end up looking for
familiar spaces when they arrive
churches like these are an obvious start
you can hear it in the praise you
recognize your languages and in some
cases people are drawn to these churches
regardless of whether they were member
of these churches in their home
countries or not so there's of course
deep spiritual reasons why a church
might be happy that they're growing
their congregations right it's
missionary work but there's also
financial reasons why this is a good
thing for them go on so as in most
churches attendees are supposed to give
a small monetary offering but there's
also quite a bit of pressure on these
congregations to pay tithes which is
strictly equivalent to a tenth of your
income it's a pretty big deal I mean in
fact in 2018 the head pastor of this
church Enoch ad warned that for those
who don't pay their tithes their
salvation is at
stake anyone who's not paying his tithe
is not going to heaven full stop he
warned that it is tantamount to robbing
God but there's actually no biblical
backing for that so last month he took
that back and said sorry I'm going to be
apologizing for saying
that if you don't pay tight you might
not make it to heaven
I'm sorry that's wrong and it's
reignited a debate about the monetary
value of these congregations so has that
impacted the popularity of of Mr Ado's
church not at all actually I think
people are quite impressed that he's
humbled himself and apologized and
Redeemed Christian Church of God the
church he runs is considered the fastest
growing Church in Britain it has almost
900 branches there across 197 countries
the church boasts 50,000 parishes and so
when all the church goers of these
parishes pay their tithes a percentage
of that must then be remitted to their
headquarters in Lagos and that obviously
is great for the church but the growth
of these churches isn't just interesting
because it's lucrative it's not just
that these new churches are growing but
that the new members skew younger than
you might expect and the youth factor is
keeping this church cool and current and
kind of innovative ooh The Economist
loves Innovation what's going on here
well the Young members are going digital
they're taking their evangelism online
so increasingly since the pandemic you
have live streamed Services as well as
iners ones and that helps people set up
small parishes and everything from old
pubs to living rooms because they can
just stream the services live you very
often hear pastors asking their
worshippers mid service to like the live
streams on YouTube so that the algorithm
boost their messages on the feeds I mean
you have QR codes for people to pay
their tith in multiple currencies from
wherever they are there's even
specifically in the case of this church
a digital missionary bot called Apostle
Steven that's meant to help answer
naughty spiritual questions that you
might reserve for a minister so
naturally I asked if I'd be blocked from
Heaven if I didn't pay my tithes while
tithing is encouraged and beneficial for
spiritual growth and supporting the
church it is not a condition for
salvation yeah so they seem to have got
their ducks in a row on that one but but
there are benefits of this that again go
beyond the church's bottom line and you
mentioned that a lot of these
congregations are largely made up of
migrants is it kind of part of the deal
that they're trying to to integrate
locally wherever they are well this is
the thing not really in fact I found
that these churches are specifically
leaning into their African origins and
the cultural connotations that come with
these churches and using that to make
their congregations feel more at home so
many of these churches also offer
services in local African languages and
I specifically went to a EUR
one we thank God for sustaining our
lives up to this
time the idea is that these Services can
help keep lesser spoken languages that
migrants might miss alive so Fe Adano
who pioneered eura language services at
this Branch told me that people find
that their prayers are more powerful
when they get to do it in their native
languages but if you left home many
years ago you might have forgotten some
of that key
vocab I our Bible I think I have to go
to English I'm sorry at this
time please I want us to open our Bible
and this is the phenomenon we're not
just seeing in Nigerian churches British
branches of the Ghana headquartered
Church of the Pentecost hold weekly
services in tree right after their
English ones but leaning into the
africanness and making it most of all
appealing for migrants is kind of in in
contrast to that missionary mission
right the idea of spreading it to the
communities of wherever they are are
they not missing a trick there well if
you have enough new members coming from
the community that you already know I
guess the feeling is that you might not
have to this idea that these churches
are here on a reverse Mission so like
taking the gospel back to those who
brought it right doesn't seem to be as
important anymore as Keeping the Faith
alive and so as young Africans move
across the world not just to Britain to
everywhere from the Netherlands to
Canada you're likely to be hearing more
of this wherever you
are all right tell me how I say thank
you in
eura O I'll try
or thanks for having me Jason
what is the silliest moment in Gladiator
2 there are quite a lot Katherine Nixie
is a Britain correspondent for The
Economist so is it when a gladiator
rides a rhino in the arena or is it when
our hero Paul mgal fights alongside his
wife in battle she's been provided with
a breastplate that is molded to her
actual breast or is it when he has to
fight a computer generated monkey Park
Gibbon Park Gollum in the arena or maybe
it's the way that he keeps quoting from
the first Gladiator film saying things
like strength and honor and I will have
my Vengeance though he doesn't actually
ask are you not entertained probably
because you won't be or at least not as
much as last
time who is he
unleash hell that was what the first
Gladiator said at the beginning of the
first Gladiator film but for almost
everyone who saw that film this was
Heaven ma from the moment that musley
Maximus desus Meridius appeared father
to a murdered son husband to a murdered
wife possessor of the finest forearms
that had been seen on screen for a while
the world was smitten
the the new film has changed a bit it's
got a completely new cast you kind of
had to do that on screen as offscreen
both Gladiators and Emperors have very
short life
expectancies but not much else has
changed the musle Maximus has become the
even more muscly Lucius the Mad Emperor
Commodus has become two mad Emperors
Gator and
carala all period dramas are set in not
one era but two the one they're
ostensibly about and the one that
they're actually filmed in Bridgeton
with its subd Abby dialogue and its
colorblind casting was every bit as much
about 2020 as
1813 Roman epics are all similarly dated
so
quovadis which was a 1951 American Film
was about a very 1950s Style of American
Christianity millions of persons have
already seen and applauded mgm's mighty
technol
spectacle I'm now about to begin this
strange history of my life of my family
I'm going to marry the British
television series I gordus offered racy
1970s debauchery that was also very
British and the original Gladiator
expressed the kind of idealism about
democracy and the hope for it that
happened at the turn of the Millennium
so Marcus aelius wanted Maximus to help
return power to the people this was
basically total nonsense but it was very
fitting for the year
2000 this was history backing up Francis
fama's the end of History
it's very hard to say what Gladiator 2
says about today this film feels much
more muddled it pays some lip service
democracy but belief in democracy on
screen as off now seems to feel far more
feeble than before the true villains in
this film seem to be the idol Rich its
Heroes AR Rome's immigrant workers so
the enslaved Lucius toils with
superhuman strength throughout including
a very strange scene where he's on a
Roman rowing machine his fellow
Gladiators also come across well as does
their Indian doctor even the wicked
Gladiator Master mcus is much more
appealing than the dimwit Aristocrats
who he serves and
outwits so what is the dream that is
roam well to judge by this sequel full
employment outwitting the rich and
genial race relations the other thing
about this film is that women feel
improbably emancipated not only do they
fight alongside their men in battle they
also Bellow in the Coliseum alongside
their meno it all feels very 2024 and
very worthy what it is not is very
thrilling this might make it a bad film
but it doesn't make it bad history
ancient Rome was incredibly diverse it
stretched from Spain to Syria had a
population of around 60 million people
and many of them were on the move so we
know that pottery from North Africa
turned up in Iona in Scotland and pretty
much everybody seems to have turned up
at the Coliseum in Rome when it opened
so there's a poet called Marshall who
wrote that when he went there he saw a
Ians Egyptians yenis Ethiopians even
Germans they were all
there and the Romans were largely
uninterested in the skin color of the
people who turned up in Rome so a North
African might become emperor as mcus who
appears in this film later did almost
without comment on his
skin this is not to say that Rome was a
racial Utopia or a social Utopia or any
kind of Utopia far from it the people
who the Romans really hated were not
Southern ones but on the whole the hairy
Northern ones Germany was menacing
Britain was dismal while the inhabitants
of Paul mescal's Ireland were according
to the geographer strabo maneaters as
well as heavy eaters who also had sex
with their
mothers all films are going to corrupt
their subjects John M the author once
said that making a film out of a book is
like turning a cow into an Oxo Cube
making empire into a film especially an
Empire that was so massive and lasted
for a millennium is even harder yet
nuances inevitably going to be lost this
film's problems go Way Beyond mere
inaccuracy or crassness it just doesn't
feel like it has a point great Roman
rulers were those ones who remodeled
Rome to suit themselves so hadrien
rebuilt the pantheon Titus completed the
conium and Augustus famously found Rome
brick and left it marble they changed
the city they changed the way that
people saw the city great films about
Rome do exactly the same thing I
Claudius did quovadis did Spartacus did
and two decades ago sir Ridley Scott did
he changed the way he thought about Rome
this film definitely will not
that's all for this episode of the
intelligence the show's editors are
Chris impy and Jack Gil our Deputy
editor is John Joe develin and our sound
designer is Will Row our senior
producers are Rory Galloway and Sarah
luk our senior creative producer is
William Warren our producers are Maggie
kadifa Benji guy and Barkley Bram and
our assistant producers are Henrietta
mcfallen and kunel Patel with extra
production help this week from Jonathan
day we'll all see you back here for the
weekend intelligence tomorrow